docs: add small table caching proposal (#23673)
pingcap/tidb: docs/design/2021-03-30-small-table-caching.md

# Proposal: Caching a table in memory

- Author(@tiancaiamao)
- Discussion PR: https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/23673
- Tracking Issue: https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/25293

## Introduction

For a small, frequently visited, and rarely changed table, caching the whole table in memory in the TiDB server can improve performance.

## Motivation or Background

For tables that are too small, they are located in just one region, that region would become a hotspot, and such hotspots would cause a performance bottleneck. By directly caching the small table data in the TiDB layer, such hotspot issues can be solved.

> We are caching tables for some scenarios already, in a way we're not realized. For example, our handling of global variables. When the client has a new connection request, TiDB needs to load global variables. After a downtime or restart in some situations, all clients will reconnect the TiDB server simultaneously, loading global variables becomes a hotspot. A special processing of TiDB is to cache global variables, and the modification of global variables will take 3 seconds to take effect. The data of privilege related tables are also cached.

Reviewer: May I ask where you got the 3 seconds from? There used to be a cache feature which was 2 seconds, but since TiDB ~5.1/5.2 there has been a sysvar cache. It reloads every 30 seconds, but when I profiled it -- it took a lot less time than 2 seconds. If it takes this long, we should investigate it, since it presumbly will hurt thoughput on low core count machines.

Reviewer: Actually - I didn't realise the date. The proposal is 1 year old, and this text likely describes the old behavior. The point is still valid in user cases, as well as the table `mysql.tidb` which some system variables much read from for legacy reasons.

Author: > The proposal is 1 year old, and this text likely describes the old behavior.

Exactly!

Reviewer: Lets make it accurate just so future readers understand current context:
```suggestion
We are caching tables for some scenarios already, in a way we're not realized. For example, our handling of global variables. To prevent row-at-a-time loading of each system variable from TiKV, we needed to implement the [sysvar cache](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/24359). This helps reduce `show variables like ..` latency, but the data set is small and the problem is very generic. It also doesn't help in cases where system variables read from `mysql.tidb` instead, which does not have a cache. The data of privilege related tables are also cached.
```

The "read" lock needs to maintain a lease for a while, and the lease should be renewed continuously. The underlying data will be safe as long as the read lock lease hold.

When performing a modification, the meta-information should be checked first. If there is a "read" lock, the "read" lock needs to be upgraded to a "write intend" lock. This step prevents the read lock from renewing the lease. After the lease expires, the meta status is change to "write" lock, write operation can be performed afterward. And after the write operation finishes, the "write" lock should be cleared, so that the subsequent "read" lock can be added and the data can be cached again.

The "write" lock also needs a TTL(time to live) to handle abnormal situations. For example, if the TiDB server crashes after the write lock succeeds, TTL gives us a hint of how to clean the orphan write lock.

Put all things together, we have this interface:

```
type StateRemote interface {

> 	Load()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Load()
```

    LockForRead()
    LockForWrite()
    RenewLease()
    WriteAndUnlock()
}
```

### Management of lock meta information

> What’s the granularity of the lock? One option is to implement the meta lock at the key-value level. The advantage is that the granularity is finer and the updating performance is better. If we cache the key-value record, modifying one key would not affect the cache of the other keys.  The disadvantage is that this will invade the current transaction layer implementation, and make our transaction more complex. Considering the current implementation of the transaction is very complex already, it is not wise to do so.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What’s the granularity of the lock? One option is to implement the meta lock at the key-value level. The advantage is that the granularity is finer and the updating performance is better. If we cache the key-value record, modifying one key would not affect the cache of the other keys. The disadvantage is that this will invade the current transaction layer implementation, and make our transaction more complex. Considering the current implementation of the transaction is very complex already, it is not wise to do so.
```

The other option is to implement the meta lock at the table level. Each table corresponds to one meta lock record. As long as any key of the table is modified, the table cache becomes invalid. Assuming that we only deal with small tables, and this table is updated infrequently, this option should be acceptable.

For updating operation, the `StateRemote` interface needs to be implemented. The following part of this section describes the management of lock meta information, where it should be stored, and how it is used.

Such a table could be used to store the meta-information:

```
CREATE TABLE mysql.table_cache_meta (
   tid int primary key,
   lock_type enum('NONE','READ','INTEND','WRITE'),
   lease uint64,

>    oldReadLease uint64,

Reviewer 2: May be `old_read_lease ` is better to have same format with `lock_type` . But we should also update the exist code.

Author: Yes ... until recently I find this silly mistake: the naming style ...
But update this code would add another bootstrap version which is bad

The read operation flow diagram:

![](./imgs/cached-table-read.png)

The write operation flow diagram:

![](./imgs/cached-table-write.png)

### How to enable this feature

The syntax of OceanBase's replicated table is to add the `DUPLICATE_SCOPE` option after the CREATE TABLE statement.

I propose to use "ALTER TABLE t [CACHE|NOCACHE]" for the syntax. This is a switch that can be turned on or off. A user can decide to use it by themself. The write performance will become very bad after caching.

"ALTER TABLE t CACHE" is a DDL operation. Assuming that all the TiDB instances know that a table is not cached, there is no correctness problem; Assuming that all tidb instances make a consensus that a table is cached, the correctness is guaranteed by the locking algorithm mentioned before. However, during the DDL operation, if some TiDB instances think that the cache is enabled, while some other instances think that the cache is not enabled, there would be a correctness issue. 

> To address that problem, an intermediate `Switching` state is introduced, the schema change process is similar to the LOCK TABLE statement's implementation:

Reviewer: I assume that because there is a `Switching State` there is no risk that using an older server binary in the cluster will lead to correctness issues, because Enabled can never be reached?

However, there is a second issue:
- Once the enabled state is entered, how do you prevent that an older version of TiDB is not started, and causes correctness issues by not respecting the flag?

Author: I never assume different version tidb binaries run together.
The only scene that there are both new and old version tidb server binary coexist I can come up with is the rolling upgrade/downgrade scenario.

Rolling upgrade should be almost safe, because this new feature is not used yet.
While rolling downgrade is not supported, there is no correctness guarantee in that case.

The DDL schema change protocol is used to ensure the safety of the DDL operation, and here it can't (and is not designed to) handle the rolling upgrade operation.

Author: > how do you prevent that an older version of TiDB is not started, and causes correctness issues

I can't prevent that.

> Disabled => Switching => Enabled

- In the Disabled state, all TiDB instances know that there is no cache for the table, it can be read and written normally.
- In the Enabled state, all TiDB instances know that the table is cached, and the "lock" meta information should be checked before reading and writing.
- In the switching state, all read operation goes to the original table; and write operation needs to check the "write lock" first.

The cluster may have Disabled and Switching, or Switching and Enabled on different TiDB instances at the same time, but Disabled and Enabled will not coexist at the same time.

### Compatibility

The entry of the feature is the 'ALTER TABLE' statement. If the user does not explicitly call it, there will be no impact.

Metadata management will introduce persistent data. The old version TiDB does not access or use the meta-data, so there should not be any problem when upgrading or downgrading.

> It is unsafe to mix the old and new versions of the binary, but rolling update is OK because there won’t be any cached tables in the old cluster. 

Author: The limitation is documented here @morgo

Reviewer: I saw this, but it's not as clear to me as it should be. I don't think you will be able to solve it because it's blocked in Product Managment, but you can spell it out such as:

```suggestion
It is unsafe to mix the old and new versions of TiDB when using cached tables. Rolling updates are safe, but there is a risk that if an old version of a TiDB server re-joins after a table is in cached 'Enabled' state it could modify the contents in an unsafe manner. Currently _downgrade_ is not technically supported by TiDB, but there is no technical mechanism which prevents an older versioned binary joining a newer versioned cluster. We need to solve this issue to perform meta-data upgrades, but it is currently blocked in the requirements phase, because we have not decided from which versions upgrade/downgrade will be supported.
```

For updating operation, the `StateRemote` interface needs to be implemented. The following part in this section describes the management of meta-information, where it should be stored, and how it is used.

Such a table could be used to store the meta information:

```
CREATE TABLE mysql.table_cache_meta (
   tid int primary key,
   lock_type enum('NONE','READ','WRITE'),
   lease uint64,
);
```

This table contains the `tid`, `lock_type` and `lease` information.
- `tid` records the ID of the table being cached
- `lock_type` decides whether the current state is read locked or write locked,
- `lease` is used for the read locks lease renewal, and also for cleanup the write locks

LockForRead() corresponds to this operation:

```
update table_cache_meta set lock ='READ', lease = %? where  tid = %? and lock !='WRITE'
```

RenewLease() corresponds to this operation:

```
update table_cache_meta set lease = %? where tid = %? and lock ='READ'
```

LockForWrite() corresponds to this operation:

```

> update table_cache_meta set lock ='WRITE', lease = %?' where tid = %?

Author: 1. write needs to wait for read lease gone, so if sleep() in the code before this call

2. no starvation for write, because when the write set the state to Write Intend, the read lock can't renew its lease any more

> update table_cache_meta set lock ='WRITE', lease = %?' where tid = %?

Author: I'll update the document to clarify that

Refer to https://zhuanlan.zhihu.com/p/78402011

The biggest challenge of copying data to multiple machines is that the modification of data must take effect on all machines in real time, otherwise some machines read the new data and the other part reads the old data. This must be a function that does not meet the needs of users. OceanBase uses a special broadcast protocol to ensure the copy consistency of the replicated table. When the replicated table is modified, all the copies will be modified at the same time. Moreover, the modification operation will only take effect when the copies on all machines are modified successfully.

> In a distributed system, another thorny problem will arise again. If a machine fails during the process of modifying the replicated table, and the replica of the replicated table on the failed machine cannot be modified, then the replicated table can no longer be modified? If this problem is not solved, the replication table will drag down the user's operation in the event of a machine failure. Ocean Base uses a lease mechanism to solve this problem. The valid copy of the replicated table on each machine will get a lease. When the replicated table is modified, the modification must be synchronized to all leased replicas. In the event of a machine failure, the lease of the replicated table copy on the failed machine becomes invalid, and the invalidated copy will not be synchronized with new modifications, so subsequent modification operations of the replicated table will not be blocked. The invalid copy will also refuse the read operation to ensure that the old data will not be read. When the invalid copy is restored, the missing data can be chased up, and the lease will be re-granted after it catches up to the latest state. "

Reviewer 3: how about us? same as them?

Author: No, we're using totally different mechanism
